# Introduction

Antidepressants are a class of psychiatric medications primarily aimed at
treating major depressive disorders, but which are also prescribed for other
conditions such as anxiety, sleep disorders and bipolar disorder
[@ANEL74R6#Olfson_Marcus_2009_National]. In addition, they also have various
uses for physiological illnesses such as pain management in headache and
neuropathic pain [@ANEL74R6#Olfson_Marcus_2009_National]. In the UK, 70.9
million prescriptions for antidepressants were given out in 2018
[@NXVP7XKL#Iacobucci_2019_Nhs]. Given that antidepressants are a viable
treatment for a wide range of conditions with a high prescription rate,
understanding the nature of antidepressant treatment is crucial.

Results from antidepressant clinical trials estimate the prevalence of side
effects to be up to 27%, suggesting generally a high prevalence of side effects
occurring during antidepressant treatments
[@88TEM4DF#Trindade_Etal_1998_Adverse]. There are a wide range of common side
effects, including but not restricted to gastrointestinal disturbances (e.g.,
nausea and vomiting), hepatotoxicity, metabolic disturbance (e.g., weight
gain/loss) and sexual dysfunction [@6UDRAPIB#Carvalho_Etal_2016_The]. About 43%
of patients discontinue their antidepressant because of side effects
[@SAJK554U#Bull_Etal_2002_Discontinuing]. In a telephone survey involving 401
patients, even the most common and less severe side effects, such as drowsiness
(17%), weight gain (11%) and sexual dysfunction (17%) were all considered
bothersome by participants [@GV9VEAMV#Hu_Etal_2004_Incidence].

Although substantial side effects are reported in clinical trials, the
generalizability of these findings to naturalistic settings are unclear as trial
participants represent a group of highly selected individuals receiving
treatments in controlled settings [@9KISGX8W#VanDerLem_Etal_2011_The]. In
addition, the relatively short time frame of trials insufficiently assesses side
effects experienced during long-term usage as clinical trials tend to report
only short-term side effects [@GV9VEAMV#Hu_Etal_2004_Incidence].

A series of characteristics such as symptom severity and treatment types can
predict side effects of antidepressants. The side effect burden is higher in
patients suffering from more severe depression, with higher numbers of comorbid
psychiatric diagnoses, receiving tricyclic antidepressants, and who are on
higher doses of antidepressants. In turn, older individuals and individuals with
longer medication history report fewer side effects
[@942N3AV8#Bet_Etal_2013_Side]. Additionally, individuals with an anxious
depression report more side effects than individuals with non-anxious depression
[see @JAZKDWJ7#Ionescu_Etal_2014_Pharmacologic for a review].

There has been an ongoing attempt to identify correlates of response to
antidepressant. Most research center around using various biomarkers from,
for example, neuroimaging or pharmacogenetics data

There have been several investigations into identifying non-physiological
correlates of resposne to antidepressants.


Little phenotypic epidemiological research has investigated the relationship
between antidepressant effectiveness and side effects. However, there are clear
theoretical underpinnings that the same receptors might be responsible for side
effects as well as the intended drug effect [@6UDRAPIB#Carvalho_Etal_2016_The].
For instance, serotonin receptors mediate a number of functions, including
sleep, appetite, and sexual functions [@FRLIJC8E#Ferguson_2001_Ssri], all of
which are related to some of the most commonly reported side effects
[@V4LKH9NR#Williams_2018_Adverse].

In the current study, we collected self-report data through a large online
questionnaire survey from a total of more than 6,000 patients treated with
antidepressants. Participants reported a comprehensive set of side effects and
effectiveness measures for a wide range of antidepressants that they took during
their lifetime. Given the body of research indicating an association between
psychiatric diagnoses and treatment experience and experienced severity of side
effects, we will use in the current study a range of measures for psychiatric
illnesses, including several comprehensive assessments of anxiety disorders and
medication history. We aim to investigate correlates of overall side effects
severity and examine if overall severity of side effects can predict
antidepressant effectiveness. We will also explore whether any individual side
effect shows particular association with effectiveness.

We hypothesize that 1) psychiatric diagnoses, especially anxiety disorders, will
be positively associated with overall severity of side effects and
antidepressant intolerance. 2) Overall severity of side effects will be
negatively associated with antidepressant effectiveness. The analyses regarding
individual side effects and effectiveness are exploratory.

# Methods

## Sample

Participants will be derived from data collected in the Genetic Links to Anxiety
and Depression (GLAD) study. The GLAD study was started in 2018 and aims to
recruit 40,000 participants with lifetime depression and/or anxiety disorders
Phenotypic data will be collected through an online survey incoporating a wide
range of questionnaires regarding psychiatric disorders. The genetic data will
be collected with saliva samples. The recruitment process is ongoing. For
greater detail regarding the study in general, such as the method of recruitment
and participant eligibility, see @S8RUAELF#Mr_Etal_2019_The. The current study
consists of a subsample from the initial pool of the GLAD study paticipants who
completed the supplementary questionnaire related to medications.

## Variables

### Current Depression and Anxiety

We computed sum scores of all items in The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)
[@TJT5MQ4T#Kroenke_Spitzer_Williams_2001_The] and in GAD-7
[@5V9J2UQB#Spitzer_Etal_2006_Brief] to measures current depression symptoms and
current anxiety symptoms respectively.

### Lifetime Depression and Anxiety

We adapted the Composite International Diagnostic Interview
[@8G9FP6E4#Kessler_Etal_2004_Clinical] as a questionnaire to assess lifetime
depression and anxiety, the diagnostic algorithms for which can be found in the
appendix.

### Number of Panic Disorder Symptoms

The panic disorder questionnaire was adapted from the Australian Genetics of
Depression Study [@LQXHR49R#Byrne_Etal_2019_The], where the items concerning
panic disorder symptoms were used to calculate a total sum score. A typical such
item is presented as follows: "Have you ever been afraid that you were going to
lose control/go crazy?". A complete list of items used can be found in the
appendix.

### Number of Relatives with Psychiatric Disorders

We also adapted the assessment for family history of psychiatric disorders from
the Australian Genetics of Depression Study, from which we computed a sum score
of the numbers of relatives having suffered from a range of psychiatric
disorders. The exact items used can be found in the appendix.

### Number of Psychiatric Diagnoses

Participants were presented with a range of psychiatric disorders and asked to
indicate which they have ever been diagnosed with. The number of indicated
diagnoses were calculated for each participant. A complete list of disorders
included can be found in the appendix.

### Earliest Treatment Start Age

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, the age at
which they started the treatment. A typical such item is presented as: "How old
were you when you started taking Citalopram (e.g. Cipramil)?"From all the
treatment start age a participant indicated, we calculated the earliest
treatment start age.

### Total Duration of Antidepressant Treatment

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, the duration
of the treatment. A typical such item is presented as: "How long did you
take/have you been taking Citalopram (e.g. Cipramil)?" We calculated the total
duration by summing the durations for all antidepressants a participant has
taken.

### Side Effect Severity Index

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, whether they
experienced a range of possible side effects. A complete list of side effect
items can be found in the appendix. We computed an overall side effect index by
averaging the number of total side effects experienced by the number of
antidepressants taken. For instance, a participant may have taken four
antidepressants in lifetime and had in total twenty experiences of side effects
(in which the participant might have experienced a side effect multiple times
from different antidepressants), this index would then be expressed with a value
of 5 calculated by twenty total side effect experiences divided by the four
antidepressants taken in lifetime.

### Overall Side Effect Severity Rating

Participants rated the overall severity of side effects of antidepressant(s) on
a 1 to 5 scale, where 1 indicates very bad side effects and 5 indicates no or
only very mild side effects.

### Likelihood of Treatment Intolerance

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, whether they
had to stop taking the antidepressant because of side effects. We computed the
likelihood of treatment intolerance by averaging the number of instances of
treatment intolerance by the number of antidepressants taken, in a similar
fashion to the side effect severity index.

### Average Effectiveness Index

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, how well the
antidepressant worked by choosing one of 1) "Not at all well", 2) "Moderately
well" , 3) "Very well" or 4) "Don't know". We computed the average effectiveness
index by averaging the sum of this rating across antidepressants, in a similar
fashion to the side effect severity index.

### Overall Benefit

Participants rated the overall benefit of side effects of antidepressant(s) on a
1 to 5 scale, where 1 indicates the worst rating and 5 the best rating.

### Number of Best aspects of Antidepressant Treatment

Participants reported what the best aspect of taking the antidepressant(s) were
by choosing all of the following that applied: 1) “Relief of depressive
symptoms”, 2) “Relief of other key symptoms”, 3) “Reduction in suicidal thinking
or actions”, 4) “Return of normal emotions”, 5) “Improved relationships”, 6)
“Getting back to normal daily activities”, 7) “Restored control over my mood and
actions”. We computed the number of best aspects of antidepressant treatment by
counting the number of options endorsed by the participant.

### Likelihood of Remission

Participants were asked to indicate for each antidepressant taken, whether they
experienced any further symptoms after taking antidepressant for a period of
time. We computed the likelihood of remission by averaging the number of
instances where no further symptoms were experienced by the number of
antidepressants taken, in a similar fashion to the side effect severity index.

### Average Improvement Duration

Participants reported for each antidepressant, how long the improvement lasts
after treatment by choosing one of the following that applied: 1) “Less than a
month”, 2) “1 to 2 months”, 3) “3 to 6 months”, 4) “7 to 12 months”, 5) “More
than 12 months”, 6) “I didn't have any improvement in symptoms” and 7) “Not
sure”. We computed the average improvement duration by averaging the improvement
duration rating across antidepressants taken, in a similar fashion to the side
effect severity index.

### Number of Antidepressant Taken in Each Category

We first try to cluster antidepressants based on their receptor affinity
measured by the equilibrium dissociation constant
[@FPQLNSHM#Ma_Yang_He_2018_Overview].  The data of receptor affinity of
antidepressants used were gathered from
[@M2X44HYW#Tatsumi_Etal_1997_Pharmacological;
@QX3D4ZJC#Owens_Etal_1997_Neurotransmitter;
@3CRD7AQR#Brunton_Chabner_Knollman_2011_Goodman;
@UXBL9CLY#Schatzberg_Nemeroff_2001_Essentials;
@BYRQNZBM#Cusack_Nelson_Richelson_1994_Binding].

We then apply the X-means clustering algorithm
[@M9GECIUD#Pelleg_Moore_2000_Xmeans]. The X-means clustering algorithm is an
extension of the K-means clustering method with an unspecified number of
clustering centroids. Starting from one centroid, the algorithm repeatedly
attempts to divide one of the centroids into two and keeps the best split by
comparing the resulting AIC and BIC.

After clustering the medications into categories, we will compute how many
medications in each category a participant takes.

#### Variable Binning

Note that the likelihood of remission, the likelihood of intolerance and average
effectiveness index are computed by averaging a series of items with only two or
three possible levels. These variables would seemingly be continuous because
they could potentially take any value between the maximum and minimum of the
individual items used to compute them. However, as the items have only limited
possible levels and we would expect participants not to have taken a great many
antidepressants in their lifetime, such averaging will produce only a few unique
values with a reasonable number of observations. Hence it will not be desirable
to treat these variables as having continuous distributions. To overcome this,
we will bin these variables into discrete levels. The number of bins were
determined by inspection of the stem-and-leaf plots and histograms. It is
selected such that the cut-offs are most natural, and that there are a
sufficient number of bins to minimize loss of information and yet retaining an
appropriate number of observations in each bin.

## Statistical Analyses

### Correlates of Overall Side Effects Severity and Treatment Intolerance

The first analysis will examine the potential correlates of overall side
effects. Explanatory variables concerning the length of medication history were
included, as they have been shown to have negative association with the number
of reported side effects [@942N3AV8#Bet_Etal_2013_Side]. These variables include
earliest treatment start age and total duration on antidepressants. The number
of co-morbid psychiatric diagnoses, current depression and anxiety scores,
lifetime anxiety and the number of panic disorder symptoms are included because
highly similar constructs have been shown to be associated with the number of
reported side effects, details of which were explained in the introduction. In
addition, we include in the model, the number of antidepressants taken in each
category, as tricyclic antidepressants have been shown to correlate positively
with the number of reported side effects. We would like to see if any similar
pattern will emerge when we classify antidepressants by receptor affinity.
Finally, although the GLAD study was planned to collect phenotype as well as
genotype data from participants, the genotype data is not yet available, hence
we include the number of relatives with psychiatric diagnoses as a proxy for
genetic load. Three outcome variables will be used, including the side effect
severity index, overall side effect severity rating and the likelihood of
intolerance, each to be examined in a seperate model. We plan to adjust all
models for sex and age.

### Effectiveness and Overall Side Effects Severity and Treatment Intolerance

The second analysis will examine the correlation between effectiveness and
overall side effects. We will use the combinations of three different
explanatory variables and five different outcome variables, leading to in total
fifteen models. The explanatory variables include the side effect severity
index, overall side effect severity rating and the likelihood of intolerance.
The outcome variables include the average effectiveness index, overall benefit,
the likelihood of remission, the number of best aspects and the average
improvement duration. We plan to adjust the models for age, sex, earliest
treatment start age and total duration on antidepressants (length of medication
history), number of psychiatric diagnoses, current depression and anxiety,
number of panic disorder symptoms, lifetime depression and anxiety, number of
relatives with psychiatric diagnoses (genetic load) and number of
antidepressants taken in each category. All these covariates have been shown to
correlate with side effects and their potential association with effectiveness
can also be reasonably suspected.

### Effectiveness and Individual Side Effects

The final, explanatory analysis will examine if any of the individual side
effects shows particular association with antidepressant effectiveness. More
specifically, we will look into whether a participant who is more likely to
experience a side effect will report higher effectiveness. The likelihood of
suffering from a side effect is defined as the average number of its occurrences
across antidepressants taken. For instance, a participant may have taken four
antidepressants in lifetime and had headaches from two of these antidepressants,
this would be expressed with a value of 0.5 calculated by 2 occurrences of the
side effect divided by the four antidepressants taken in lifetime. The outcome
variables and the planned covariates to adjust for will be the same as those in
the second analysis examining the correlation between effectiveness and overall
side effect severity.

#### Multiple Testing

We will use the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure
[@WBB32ZII#Benjamini_Hochberg_1995_Controlling] to control the false discovery
rate at < 0.05.

# References
